WHEN I was six months old, my parents moved from Kesswil onLake Constance to Laufen, the castle and vicarage above the Fallsof the Rhine. This was in 1875. My memories begin with my secondor third year. I recall the vicarage, the garden, the laundry house, thechurch, the castle, the Falls, the small castle of Worth, and thesexton's farm. These are nothing but islands of memory afloat in asea of vagueness, each by itself, apparently with no connectionbetween them. One memory comes up which is perhaps theearliest of my life, and is indeed only a rather hazy impression. I amlying in a pram, in the shadow of a tree. It is a fine, warm summer
day, the sky blue, and golden sunlight darting through green leaves.
The hood of the pram has been left up. I have just awakened to theglorious beauty of the day, and have a sense of indescribable wellbeing. I see the sun glittering through the leaves and blossoms of
the bushes. Everything is wholly wonderful, colorful, and splendid.
Another memory: I am sitting in our dining room, on the west side of
the house, perched in a high chair and spooning up warm milk withbits of broken bread in it. The milk has a pleasant taste and acharacteristic smell. This was the first time I became aware of thesmell of milk. It was the moment when, so to speak, I becameconscious of smelling. This memory, too, goes very far back.
Still another: a lovely summer evening. An aunt said to me, "Now I
am going to show you something." She took me out in front of thehouse, on the road to Dachsen. On the far horizon the chain of the
Alps lay bathed in glowing sunset reds. The Alps could be seenvery clearly that evening. "Now look over there"--I can hear her
saying to me in Swiss dialect---"the mountains are all red." For thefirst time I consciously saw the Alps. Then I was told that the next
day the village children would be going on a school outing to theUetliberg, near Zurich. I wanted so much to go too. To my sorrow, I
was informed that children as small as I could not go along, therewas nothing to be done about it. From then on the Uetliberg andZurich became an unattainable land of dreams, near to the glowing,
snow- covered mountains.
From a somewhat later period comes another memory. My mother
took me to the Thurgau to visit friends, who had a castle on LakeConstance. I could not be dragged away from the water. The waves
from the steamer washed up to the shore, the sun glistened on thewater, and the sand under the water had been curled into littleridges by the waves. The lake stretched away and away into thedistance. This expanse of water was an inconceivable pleasure tome, an incomparable splendor. At that time the idea became fixed
in my mind that I must live near a lake; without water, I thought,
nobody could live at all.
Still another memory comes up: strangers, bustle, excitement. Themaid comes running and exclaims, "The fishermen have found acorpse--came down the Falls--they want to put it in the washhousel"
My father says, "Yes, yes." I want to see the dead body at once. Mymother holds me back and sternly forbids me to go into the garden.
When all the men had left, I quickly stole into the garden to thewashhouse. But the door was locked. I went around the house; at
the back there was an open drain running down the slope, and I sawblood and water trickling out. I found this extraordinarily interesting.
At that time I was not yet four years old.
Yet another image: I am restive, feverish, unable to sleep. My father
carries me in his arms, paces up and down, singing his old student
songs. I particularly remember one I was especially fond of andwhich always used to soothe me, "Alles schweige, jeder neige ..."
The beginning went something like that. To this day I can remember
my father's voice, singing over me in the stillness of the night.
I was suffering, so my mother told me afterward, from general
eczema. Dim intimations of trouble in my parents' marriagehovered around me. My illness, in 1878, must have been connectedwith a temporary separation of my parents. My mother spent
several months in a hospital in Basel, and presumably her illnesshad something to do with the difficulty in the marriage. An aunt of
mine, who was a spinster and some twenty years older than mymother, took care of me. I was deeply troubled by my mother's
being away. From then on, I always felt mistrustful when the word"love" was spoken. The feeling I associated with "woman" was for along time that of innate unreliability. "Father," on the other hand,
meant reliability and powerlessness. That is the handicap I startedoff with. Later, these early impressions were revised: I have trustedmen friends and been disappointed by them, and I have mistrustedwomen and was not disappointed.
While my mother was away, our maid, too, looked after me. I still
remember her picking me up and laying my head against her
shoulder. She had black hair and an olive complexion, and was
quite different from my mother. I can see, even now, her hairline, her
throat, with its darkly pigmented skin, and her ear. All this seemed
to me very strange and yet strangely familiar. It was as though shebelonged not to my family but only to me, as though she wereconnected in some way with other mysterious things I could not
understand. This type of girl later became a component of myanimal. The feeling of strangeness which she conveyed, and yet of
having known her always, was a characteristic of that figure whichlater came to symbolize for me the whole essence of womanhood.
1 For this and other technical terms which are commonly used by Jung but
may be unfamiliar to the reader or no longer fresh in his mind, see the
glossary at the end of the book.
From the period of my parents' separation I have another memoryimage: a young, very pretty and charming girl with blue eyes and fair
hair is leading me, on a blue autumn day, under golden maple andchestnut trees along the Rhine below the Falls, near Worth castle.
The sun is shining through the foliage, and yellow leaves lie on theground. This girl later became my mother-in-law. She admired myfather. I did not see her again until I was twenty-one years old.
These are my outward memories. What follow now are morepowerful, indeed overwhelming images, some of which I recall onlydimly. There was a fall downstairs, for example, and another fall
against the angle of a stove leg. I remember pain and blood, adoctor sewing a wound in my head--the scar remained visible until
my senior year at the Gymnasium. My mother told me, too, of thetime when I was crossing the bridge over the Rhine Falls toNeuhausen. The maid caught me just in time--I already had one legunder the railing and was about to slip through. These things point
to an unconscious suicidal urge or, it may be, to a fatal resistanceto life in this world.
At that time I also had vague fears at night. I would hear thingswalking about in the house. The muted roar of the Rhine Falls wasalways audible, and all around lay a danger zone. People drowned,
bodies were swept over the rocks. In the cemetery nearby, thesexton would dig a hole--heaps of brown, upturned earth. Black,
solemn men in long frock coats with unusually tall hats and shinyblack boots would bring a black box. My father would be there in hisclerical gown, speaking in a resounding voice. Women wept. I wastold that someone was being buried in this hole in the ground.
Certain persons who had been around previously would suddenlyno longer be there. Then I would hear that they had been buried,
and that Lord Jesus had taken them to himself.
My mother had taught me a prayer which I had to say every evening.
I gladly did so because it gave me a sense of comfort in face of thevague uncertainties of the night:
Spread out thy wings, Lord Jesus mild,
And take to thee thy chick, thy child.
"If Satan would devour it,
No harm shall overpower it,"
So let the angels sing! "[2]
 2 Breit' aus die Fluglein beide,
 O Jesu meine Freude
Und nimm dein Kuchlein ein.
Will Satan es verschlingen,
Dann lass die Engel singen:
Dies Kind soll unverletzet sein.
Lord Jesus was comforting, a nice, benevolent gentleman like Herr
Wegenstein up at the castle, rich, powerful, respected, and mindful
of little children at night. Why he should be winged like a bird was aconundrum that did not worry me any further. Far more significant
and thought-provoking was the fact that little children werecompared to chicks which Lord Jesus evidently "took" reluctantly,
like bitter medicine. This was difficult to understand. But I
understood at once that Satan liked chicks and had to be preventedfrom eating them. So, although Lord Jesus did not like the taste, heate them anyway, so that Satan would not get them.. As far as that
went, my argument was comforting. But now I was hearing that LordJesus "took" other people to himself as well, and that this "taking"
was the same as putting them in a hole in the ground.
This sinister analogy had unfortunate consequences. I began to
distrust Lord Jesus. He lost the aspect of a big, comforting,
benevolent bird and became associated with the gloomy black menin frock coats, top hats, and shiny black boots who busiedthemselves with the black box.
These ruminations of mine led to my first conscious trauma. Onehot summer day I was sitting alone, as usual, on the road in front of
the house, playing in the sand. The road led past the house up a hill,
then disappeared in the wood on the hilltop. So from the house youcould see a stretch of the road. Looking up, I saw a figure in astrangely broad hat and a long black garment coming down fromthe wood. It looked like a man wearing women's clothes. Slowly thefigure drew nearer, and I could now see that it really was a manwearing a kind of black robe that reached to his feet. At the sight of
him I was overcome with fear, which rapidly grew into deadly terror
as the frightful recognition shot through my mind: "That is a Jesuit."
Shortly before, I had overheard a conversation between my father
and a visiting colleague concerning the nefarious activities of theJesuits. From the half-irritated, half-fearful tone of my father'sremarks I gathered that "Jesuits" meant something speciallydangerous, even for my father- Actually I had no idea what Jesuits
were, but I was familiar with the word "Jesus" from my little prayer.
The man coming down the road must be in disguise, I thought; that
was why he wore women's clothes. Probably he had evil intentions.
Terrified, I ran helter--skelter into the house, rushed up the stairs,
and hid under a beam in the darkest corner of the attic. I don't knowhow long I remained there, but it must have been a fairly long time,
because, when I ventured down again to the first floor andcautiously stuck my head out of the window, far and wide there was
not a trace of the black figure to be seen. For days afterward thehellish fright clung to my limbs and kept me in the house. And evenwhen I began to play in the road again, the wooded hilltop was still
the object of my uneasy vigilance. Later I realized, of course, that
the black figure was a harmless Catholic priest.
At about the same time--I could not say with absolute certaintywhether it preceded this experience or not--I had the earliest dreamI can remember, a dream which was to preoccupy me all my life. I
was then between three and four years old. The vicarage stoodquite alone near Laufen castle, and there was a big meadowstretching back from the sexton's farm. In the dream I was in thismeadow. Suddenly I discovered a dark, rectangular, stone-lined
hole in the ground. I had never seen it before. I ran forward curiouslyand peered down into it. Then I saw a stone stairway leading down.
Hesitantly and fearfully, I descended. At the bottom was a doorway
with a round arch, closed off by a green curtain. It was a big, heavycurtain of worked stuff like brocade, and it looked very sumptuous.
Curiaous to see what might be hidden behind, I pushed it aside. I
saw before me in the dim light a rectangular chamber about thirtyfeet long. The ceiling was arched and of hewn stone. The floor waslaid with flagstones, and in the center a red carpet ran from theentrance to a low platform. On this platform stood a wonderfully richgolden throne. I am not certain, but perhaps a red cushion lay on theseat. It was a magnificent throne, a real king's throne in a fairy tale.
Something was standing on it which I thought at first was a treetrunk twelve to fifteen feet high and about one and a half to two feet
thick. It was a huge thing, reaching almost to the ceiling. But it wasof a curious composition: it was made of skin and naked flesh, andon top there was something like a rounded head with no face andno hair. On the very top of the head was a single eye, gazingmotionlessly upward.
It was fairly light in the room, although there were no windows andno apparent source of light. Above the head, however, was an aura
of brightness. The thing did not move, yet I had the feeling that it
might at any moment crawl off the throne like a worm and creep
toward me. I was paralyzed with terror. At that moment I heard fromoutside and above me my mother's voice. She called out, "Yes, just
look at him. That is the man-eater!" That intensified my terror still
more, and I awoke sweating and scared to death. For many nightsafterward I was afraid to go to sleep, because I feared I might haveanother dream like that.
This dream haunted me for years. Only much later did I realize that
what I had seen was a phallus, and it was decades before I
understood that it was a ritual phallus. I could never make out
whether my mother meant, "This is the man-eater," or, "That is the
man-eater." In the first case she would have meant that not LordJesus or the Jesuit was the devourer of little children, but thephallus; in the second case that the "man-eater" in general wassymbolized by the phallus, so that the dark Lord Jesus, the Jesuit,
and the phallus were identical.
The abstract significance of the phallus is shown by the fact that it
was enthroned by itself, "ithyphallically" (upright) The hole in themeadow probably represented a grave. The grave itself was anunderground temple whose green curtain symbolized the meadow,
in other words the mystery of Earth with her covering of greenvegetation. The carpet was blood-red. What about the vault?Perhaps I had already been to the Munot, the citadel of
Schaffhausen? This is not likely, since no one would take a threeyear-old child up there. So it cannot be a memory-trace. Equally, I
do not know where the anatomically correct phallus can have comefrom. The interpretation of the orificium urethrae as an eye, with thesource of light apparently above it, points to the etymology of theword phallus (shining, bright).[3]
At all events, the phallus of this dream seems to be a subterraneanGod "not to be named," and such it remained throughout my youth,
reappearing whenever anyone spoke too emphatically about Lord
Jesus. Lord Jesus never became quite real for me, never quiteacceptable, never quite lovable, for again and again I would think of
his underground counterpart, a frightful revelation which had beenaccorded me without my seeking it. The Jesuit's "disguise" cast itsshadow over the Christian doctrine I had been taught. Often it
seemed to me a solemn masquerade, a kind of funeral at which themourners put on serious or mournful faces but the next moment
were secretly laughing and not really sad at all. Lord Jesus seemedto me in some ways a god of death, helpful, it is true, in that hescared away the terrors of the night, but himself uncanny, a crucifiedand bloody corpse. Secretly, his love and kindness, which I always
heard praised, appeared doubtful to me, chiefly because thepeople who talked most about "dear Lord Jesus" wore black frockcoats and shiny black boots which reminded me of burials. Theywere my father's colleagues as well as eight of my uncles-all
parsons. For many years they inspired fear in me--not to speak of
occasional Catholic priests who reminded me of the terrifyingJesuit who had irritated and even alarmed my father. In later years
and until my confirmation, I made every effort to force myself to takethe required positive attitude to Christ. But I could never succeed inovercoming my secret distrust.
The fear of the "black man," which is felt by every child, was not theessential thing in that experience; it was, rather, the recognition that
stabbed through my childish brain: "That is a Jesuit." So theimportant thing in the dream was its remarkable symbolic settingand the astounding interpretation: "That is the man-eater." Not thechild's ogre of a man-eater, but the fact that this was the man-eater,
and that it was sitting on a golden throne beneath the earth. For mychildish imagination it was first of all the king who sat on a goldenthrone; then, on a much more beautiful and much higher and muchmore golden throne far, far away in the blue sky, sat God and Lord
Jesus, with golden crowns and white robes. Yet from this same
Lord Jesus came the "Jesuit," in black women's garb, with a broadblack hat, down from the wooded hill. I had to glance up there everyso often to see whether another danger might not be approaching.
In the dream I went down into the hole in the earth and foundsomething very different on a golden throne, something non-humanand underworldly, which gazed fixedly upward and fed on humanflesh. It was only fifty years later that a passage in a study of
religious ritual burned into my eyes, concerning the motif of
cannibalism that underlies the symbolism of the Mass. Only then didit become clear to me how exceedingly unchild-like, howsophisticated and oversophisticated was the thought that hadbegun to break through into consciousness in those twoexperiences. Who was it speaking in me? Whose mind haddevised them? What kind of superior intelligence was at work? I
know every numbskull will babble on about "black man," "maneater," "chance," and "retrospective interpretation," in order tobanish something terribly inconvenient that might sully the familiar
picture of childhood innocence. Ah, these good, efficient, healthyminded people, they always remind me of those optimistic tadpoleswho bask in a puddle in the sun, in the shallowest of waters,
crowding together and amiably wriggling their tails, totally unawarethat the next morning the puddle will have dried up and left themstranded.
